we are inside the new natal Intensive
Care Unit at the Kamal adwan hospital
where we have a number of newborn babies
who are suffering from severe
malnutrition and finding it very
difficult to obtain the required
medication and treatment as the Israeli
occupation continues to prevent relief
and humanitarian Aid and medication from
entering the Gaza Strip and reaching
these newborn babies as well as the
patients and the wounded in Northern
Gaza we used to admit 500 to 600 babies
a day into the hospital now we admit
between 1,000 and 1,200 babies a day we
notice that all patients are showing
signs of pness and weakness second a
picture is worth a thousand words even
newborns are
emaciated in the past every newborn baby
would have their own box of milk and
today we can barely find a single box
for the entire department the majority
of newborns we are treating today at the
Kamal adwan Hospital are without parents
they were referred to us by shelters or
other hospitals and they are without
their mothers therefore it's incumbent
upon us to offer them food and Medical
Care the situation is absolutely
catastrophic we usually feed newborn
babies every 2 to 3 hours however due to
the limited Supply we're forced to feed
them every four or 5 hours instead and
this affects their
weight whatever milk we have is split
equally amongst everyone and this will
definitely affect the baby's weight and
their Daily Progress additionally given
the poor health they're in when they're
admitted they need a sufficient quantity
of milk to support their immune system
and the current shortage prevents the
babies from recovering properly which
means they have to undergo treatment for
a longer period of time usually once
newborn babies have recovered we give
them small doses of milk to try and
gauge their health and find out if their
recovering well however given the
limited Supply we are using a 10%
glucose-based solution to try and get
them to stop
crying I'm scared for my child she has
sepsis and a severe chest infection and
she is only 23 days
[Music]
old death continues to haunt everybody
here in Northern gaza's babies and
adults continue to due to the occupation
preventing the entry of relief
humanitarian and Medical Aid including
baby formula into the strip an Sharif
alaz
shalaz well let's bring in Jonathan fer
he's a spokesperson for unra uh the UN
agency that works with Palestinian
refugees there he joins us today from
Aman Jonathan unra has been coordinating
Aid access for so many agencies on the
ground what is the situation when it
comes to getting Aid in at the moment
well it it's extremely challenging um as
as Illustrated in in the previous
reports the um the amount of Aid has has
basically halved since January um we
need to get 500 trucks a day into the
Gaza Strip simply to maintain an aid
operation that's not commercial traffic
that's 500 trucks of Aid it's simply not
happening um for a number of reasons but
this means that the population um which
is basically on life support is being
deprived of the Essentials for their
share survival you say it's hared in the
last month what reasons are the Israelis
giving for that are they saying it's
administrative are they imposing
additional checks what are you hearing
from
them it's it's a combination of factors
I mean obviously um in in any conflict
setting the the the UN talks with with
all parties involved to ensure that
convoys Aid convoys can flow freely to
get the aid to people uh that need it um
we we have a combination we we've had um
blockages on On the Border but we've
also had issues of safety within the
Gaza Strip um and also refusal of access
notably to the north um conditions have
not U made it simple to get to the north
but lack of facilitation for getting
convoys across the Gaza Strip is a huge
problem so bottlenecks um arise
inevitably and and enough it is not
getting in and it's not getting across
the Gaza Strip either Jonathan your
agency unra has said that it might to
cease operations within weeks if the
funding freezes currently in place
aren't reversed what would that mean for
gaza's Aid
infrastructure well as it stands um two
million people um rely on on support
from anra um in the Gaza Strip so that
that's almost the entire population
we're feeding over 1 million and we have
over 1 million people in um around 150
unrush shelters which um uh before
October was was school buildings those
are all massively overcrowded so
basically um if we unplug unro we unplug
the aid operation to those people and
when you see attacks like we saw today
in Gaza City can you perhaps give us a
sense of the threats that your staff
feel that they face and trying to do
their jobs there are so many thousands
of them still active on the ground in
the
STM yes indeed I mean we have 13,000
staff in Gaza and around 3,000 of them
are able to continue working um they're
doing things like Logistics warehousing
U getting uh convoys from from a to zed
to ensure that deliveries can be done
when possible they face huge huge risks
all the time um we've lost over 150
staff members killed in this war um and
um like the rest of the civilian
population they face immense risks going
about their daily lives and doing their
Duty given the pattern of attacks and
Strikes that we've seen Jonathan do you
at believe that Aid infrastructure is
being systematically targeted by the
Israelis it's it's it's it's very very
very hard to to to to say that clearly
but what what what we we do see in this
war is um that the international
humanitarian law um needs to be applied
that's absolutely essential um both in
terms of The Siege uh so The Siege needs
to be lifted but also the facilitation
of Aid operations on the ground um
that's an obligation in any War for all
parties involved um and and that needs
to
happen uh Jonathan in terms of trying to
assert some level of accountability do
you have any hope that that might be
able to happen especially given the the
lack of access and trying to determine
exactly what's happening on the
ground I mean I think at this stage our
immediate focus is on trying to to make
sure that the aid continues to flow and
gets the people that that need it um
clearly issues of accountability do
matter that that that that's something
um for um entities independent of unra
to to look to um in the future but but
clearly um there are issues of huge
concern and um we need to make sure that
International humanitarian law is
followed to the hill Jonathan we just
ran a report where literally babies are
dying because they don't have enough to
eat or drink in the north of the Gaza
Strip can you characterize the situ
ation for us at the moment in Northern
Gaza obviously conditions on the ground
are are incredibly dire should we expect
this this trend to
continue absolutely we we haven't been
able to get um food into the north since
the 23rd of January so for over a month
but already the north was the most
isolated uh region of the Gaza Strip the
most restricted in terms of Aid
operations um and just one illustration
of this fact was that when we were able
to run a convoy in January um we had um
people coming to to to to the Convoy
eating food on the spot um and indeed
for example when a bag of flour split
open when it was being unloaded um after
the crowds receded um there were people
scrambling in the dirt to try and pick
up uh flour and we've also had reports
of people grinding up bird seed to eat
and and other kinds of animal feed I
think th those th those examples speak
for themselves when it comes to the
situation and of course the lack of
water so a combination of lack of food
lack of water inevitably that causes um
huge problems for the population there
you mentioned a couple of anecdotes
there about eating bird seed or or
animal feed I understand there have been
some issues around around health
concerns around that a child got got
very sick I believe after eating some
some bread that was made with with
animal feed can you give us a sense of
of the health challenges that that
people are facing on the ground as they
try to to think creatively about how to
feed themselves and their
families well absolutely I mean I think
the the these are cases which illustrate
the the level of of absolute desperation
across the Gaza Strip and and
particularly in the north and by
definition when people are hungry
they're more vulnerable to disease
anyway because immune systems are weaker
um so um here we we basically start to
see a perfect storm and this means that
famine is looming you say famine is
looming famine is happening in In
Pockets I understand in in parts of the
Gaza Strip can you describe for us what
that looks like on the ground because
these are obviously man-made
conditions absolutely as you rightly say
this is a this is a man-made disaster
this is not the product of a natural
Hazard um what's um happening is that
the pockets um as the pockets gradually
expand and come together we start to see
a famine Zone and that's that that that
that's a huge risk because we're not
able to get um and we haven't being able
to get in in into the the north um this
month um that means that it's very hard
to assess uh clearly the situation on
the ground but what we do see and from
from staff that we have um who are who
are still able to operate there um even
with a lack of access is is exactly
these kind of problems this is a
disaster within a disaster within a
disaster in Northern Gaza we've just
been talking there about the north I'd
like to ask you a little bit about
Central and Southern Gaza too obviously
the the levels of restrictions on Aid
this is also a catastrophic situation
for people in the South where people
have been increasingly crammed into a a
tiny tiny piece of land how does the
situation in in Rafa and that kind of
area compared to what we're seeing in
Northern
Gaza well precisely as you rightly say
people have been crammed into a smaller
and smaller area um because uh people
have been displaced multiple times um
from from in the Gaza Street kind of
rolling down from the north to the South
um since the War Began I mean just to to
look at the population data there there
are currently about 1.5 million people
in Rafa that's six times the population
before the start of the war now that
means that shelters are massively
overcrowded um it's just the this the
scale of what what is happening in Rafa
um is is another illustration of the
extent of this crisis well let me ask
you then we we spoke a little bit
earlier about what would happen if unra
had to cease operations and obviously
that is a very real possibility
according to to senior officials at the
UN what would that look like on the
ground in Rafa if if that were to happen
right
now well if you imagine it in a hospital
setting and you imagine a life support
system um on is the life support machine
um for for uh over a million people in
Rafa um if you unplug the machine then
the consequences are extremely Stark um
and if Aid is not flowing in um and un
is the primary primary humanitarian
organization on the ground um the the
risks of the food crisis the Health
crisis everything in Rafa um it's just
going to be multiplied you mentioned
there that analogy of of unplugging a
life support machine that is essentially
what's happening in hospitals across the
Gaza Strip because of the lack of fuel
what is the fuel situation at the moment
especially as it pertains to to health
facilities well that yes I mean that
that that that that remains a problem
that's been a problem since the
beginning of the war um we we also have
um I mean Beyond just fuel I mean even
the lack of say solar systems something
like that so solar power um it means
that we have clinics which are operating
with no electricity well I just imagine
what it's like going to a hospital where
there's no electricity limited supplies
the level of care um that staff are able
to provide the kind of treatment is
automatically restricted um and that
that means that people are not getting
the help that they need um in in the
darest of
circumstances there a spokesperson for
unra the UN agency that works with
Palestinian refugees thank you so much
for joining us on Al jazer
Jonathan